MNRAS000, 1–24 (2026) Preprint 16 February 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.3
Spatially resolved star-formation histories of local post-starburst galaxies:
Starburst and quenching spatial patterns consistent with recent mergers
Ho-Hin Leung1,2★, Vivienne Wild1, Michail Papathomas3, Daniel J. Mortlock4,5,
Amy L. Rankine2, Emma Curtis-Lake6, Yirui Zheng7,8, Adam C. Carnall2, and
Peter H. Johansson9
1SUPA†, School of Physics & Astronomy, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9SS, UK
2SUPA, Institute for Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Royal Observatory, Edinburgh EH9 3HJ, UK
3School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9SS, UK
4Department of Physics, Imperial College London, Blackett Laboratory, Prince Consort Road, London SW7 2AZ, UK
5Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK
6Centre for Astrophysics Research, Department of Physics, Astronomy and Mathematics, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield AL10 9AB, UK
7School of Mathematics and Physics, Anqing Normal University, Anqing, People’s Republic of China
8Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Anqing Normal University, Anqing, People’s Republic of China
9Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Gustaf Hällströmin katu 2, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland
Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ
ABSTRACT
Post-starburst (PSB) galaxies, having recently experienced a starburst followed by rapid quenching, are excellent laboratories
to probe physical mechanisms that drive starbursts and shutting down of star formation. Integral-field spectroscopy reveals the
galaxies’ spatially-resolved properties, where observed directional patterns can be linked to the galaxies’ past evolution. We
measure the resolved star-formation histories (SFHs), stellar metallicity evolution and dust properties of three local PSBs from
theMaNGAsurvey,downto0.5′′resolution(∼0.3kpc)usingahierarchicalBayesianmodel.Localparameterswereconstrained
simultaneously with parameters describing spatial trends. We found that all three galaxies first experienced an outer, weaker
andslowerquenchingstarburst,followedbyacentral,strongerandfasterquenchingstarburstthatpeaked∼1Gyrafterthefirst.
The central starbursts induced a significantly stronger rise in stellar metallicity compared to the outer starbursts. These results
are consistent with the effects of a recent gas-rich (wet) merger, where the first pericentre passage triggered starbursts in the
outer regions, while the later coalescence triggers a stronger centralised starburst. We find non-axisymmetric features in the
mapsofburstmassfractionanddustattenuationinallgalaxies,whichcouldbecausedbytidaleffectsduringtherecentmerger.
Comparisonswithliteraturebinarymergersimulationssuggeststhatthegalaxies’rapidquenchingwasdrivenbygasconsumption
andthestabilisationagainstgasgravitationalcollapsebyagrowingspheroid,whileAGNfeedbackwasnotnecessarilyaprimary
cause.
Key words:galaxies:evolution – galaxies:starburst – galaxies:abundances – galaxies:stellar content – methods: statistical
1 INTRODUCTION
The shutting down of star formation in galaxies, known as “quench-
ing”, is a crucial stage of galaxy evolution as galaxies transition
from actively star-forming into “red and dead” quiescent systems
(seeDeLuciaetal.2025,forareview).However,numerousphysical
mechanismscapableofdrivingquenchinghavebeenproposedinthe
literature, ranging from simple gas exhaustion, to energy injection
from supernovae or central supermassive black holes, to influences
fromgalaxyinternalstructureandthewidergalaxyenvironment(see
Man&Belli2018,andreferencestherein).Therelativecontribution
among these mechanisms remains unclear.
A common approach to constrain the relative importance of dif-
★E-mail: hleung2@roe.ac.ukferent quenching mechanisms is to study spatially resolved patterns
in star formation. The simplest pattern identifies “inside-out” vs.
“outside-in” quenching, where either the inner or outer region com-
mencesquenchingfirstleadingtoradialgradientsincurrentstarfor-
mation rate (SFR), specific star formation rate (sSFR = SFR/stellar
mass), mean stellar ages or star formation histories (e.g. González
Delgado et al. 2016; Spindler et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2019; Bluck
et al. 2020). Quenching mechanisms that are driven by centralised
processes, such as active galactic nuclei (AGN) feedback and stel-
lar/supernovae feedback from central bursts of star formation, are
expected to result in inside-out quenching and positive SFR gradi-
ents(Zubovas&King2016;Nietal.2025;McClymontetal.2025).
On the other hand, environmental quenching mechanisms, such as
starvation of gas, tidal effects and ram-pressure stripping, could re-
sultingasbeinglostpreferentiallyfromtheouterregionsofgalaxies
©2026 The AuthorsarXiv:2602.13114v1  [astro-ph.GA]  13 Feb 2026
